negotiations over a plan to end the war
in Gaza are scheduled to start in Kat
today the region is on edge as Israel
awaits retaliation from Iran after the
killing of Hamas political leader Ismael
hania in tan negotiators want to use a
plan put together by the Biden
administration at the end of May and
endorsed by the UN Security Council it
calls for a six we ceasefire in Gaza
Hamas would release its remaining
Israeli hostages in exchange for
Palestinian prisoners isra would allow
in unlimited Aid deliveries and its
forces would withdraw from Gaza
but Hamas says it's losing faith in the
US as a mediator and will not attend the
talks the top official in Kata for the
Palestinian militant group whose October
7th terror attack sparked the war said
Hamas was still willing to be briefed
afterward on the discussed
points we expect to be told by the
mediators that Israel has accepted what
is being offered and any meeting should
be based on talking about implementation
mechanisms and setting deadlines rather
than negotiating something new otherwise
Hamas finds no reason to
participate our correspondent fedix
Thomson joins us now from Jerusalem
Felix ceasefire talks are set to
continue today in Qatar but as we heard
Hamas is not taking part in those talks
given that what's the prospect of
reaching any meaningful agreement
well I think the mediators are sort of
counting on progress being made with
Israel uh for them then to uh be to get
in contact with Hamas whose
representatives are in Doha anyways um
it's going to be interesting to see how
this pans out here in Israel several uh
media Outlets are reporting on these
negotiations as the last chance of
reaching a deal uh we've been hearing
that before it needs to be said but at
the same time it is a crucial day for
the negotiations when it comes to a
possible ceasefire in
Gaza now the mediators uh includes the
US Egypt and katar they say they only
need to work out the details of
implementation of the deal that's
already on the table so what are the
sticking points
there well there are several uh issues
uh in those negotiations first of all um
the issue of the uh Israelis uh being
held hostages in Gaza Israel would like
to receive a list of the some 30 um
hostages uh released uh alive which
Israel demands to be released alive
Hamas only wants to release such a list
after an General agreement will be made
there's also the issue of the so-called
Philadelphia Corridor which is in
principle the uh border area between uh
the Gaza Strip and Egypt which has been
a sort of Lifeline for uh Hamas in terms
of uh getting uh both goods and army
material into the Gaza Strip which
Israel doesn't want to leave uh without
any sort of um any sort of overview of
everything that's going on there and the
last point which is uh also a very
important sticking point here is the
issue of the return of Palestinians uh
to the north of the Gaza Strip Israel
would like to have some sort of a
mechanism which control
the returning Palestinians to make sure
um no armed people make it through
whereas Hamas is a bit more uh critical
about that it remains to be seen whether
any U any progress will be made as the
negotiations go on
today getting the hostages back of
course is a huge priority for Israel uh
what kind of pressure is the hostage
situation putting on Netanyahu the
Israeli leader to come to an agreement
here I think we have two uh elements of
this sort of pressure uh you mentioned
first of all we have pressure within
Israel uh the um the U Mo most of the
hostages families are putting lots of
public pressure on prime minister netan
and the Israeli government to get a deal
done it needs to be said that most of
the Israeli public uh supports such a
deal at the same time there's pressure
from the outside as well um inter the uh
mediators and uh European countries
which are allies to Israel such as uh
Germany um have been uh demanding such a
deal um and of course above all there's
the issue of the Iranian
retaliation um over the killing of uh
isia the Hamas leader looming above all
and I think um this results are too uh
to pressure system over the Israeli
government and it remains to be seen
whether this would bring us uh to a
situation where an agreement or some
sort of a frame agreement will be
reached today Fenix thank you very much
that was our correspondent Phenix
tamsett in
Jerusalem let's get some analysis now
from Professor Yosi melag he's uh with
the Middle East and North Africa program
at the thinked tank chadam house thanks
for being with us y see this deal being
ctin Doha has been on the table for
months already why are we suddenly
seeing movement in these negotiations
now what's
changed good morning I think the main
change is that the International
Community is is losing its patience with
with both sides and it wants to see it
wants to see a ceasefire the release of
the hostages humanitarian Aid enter into
Gaza and and most importantly start
looking to the day after the end of the
of the war but what happened right now
is because there is it connected closely
linked also with an expected attack by
Iran and kisala either at the same time
simultaneously or separately on Israel
as a result of Israel two assassination
one in in in Beirut and the other in
Teran of of the leader of Hamas Ismael
and officially
inut so I I think right now the link
between reaching such an agreement with
averting such an attack that can drag
the entire Middle East in into a
full-blown War so there is fresh
momentum here uh how much negotiating
power though does Hamas have left at
this point given all of the defeats that
it suffered so
far I think mainly it's it's main C is
the hostages it's holding 120 around 120
hostages we don't know how many of them
are still alive and I think the pressure
also mounting inside Israel to reach an
agreement in the release of the hostages
which the Nano government is delaying
delaying and putting new condition every
time there is there is the the Biden
proposal that n was was behind it and
drafting it and then he started delaying
and the government delaying because of
the pressure of the farai not to reach
such an agreement they put a priority on
on maintaining the war against Hamas
then the release of of of the
hostages I think this card is still is
still a strong one in the end of Hamas
but Hamas needs the end of of of the war
because of the suffering of of the
people in Gaza at one point this Con
against the organization but also bear
in mind in recent we lost many of its
its leadership yeah how difficult do you
think it will be to reach a meaningful
deal under these
circumstances extremely difficult I
think we shouldn't
underestimate because as it stands it
doesn't seems while the the world has
this sense of urgency to reach an
agreement and a a war also original War
ending the war in Gaza that already
claimed the life of some many innocent
people I think the leadership itself
don't share the sense of urgency and
definitely in the case of nanal he is
afraid of his his government collapsing
as a result of an agreement the far
right in the government keep saying that
it would leave in case of such of such
an agreement at the same time they're
provoking for instance
by praying in the in in Temple mountain
in Jerusalem is a sheer provocation of
of the Muslim world so there are
parallel conversation within Israeli
politics that make it more and more
difficult to reach an
agreement what role is the United States
playing in all of this now it's been
pressuring Israel and Hamas of course to
come to the negotiating table but Hamas
is uh is skeptical about having the us
as a mediator in this negotiation where
is the US standing this
now I think we have to look at the three
mediator as one package it's it's the
United States Egypt and catar and at the
end of the day whether the Hamas trust
the United States or not they understand
that the main country that put pressure
on the on the netan government to reach
an agreement is the United States also
recognize that the United States right
now is different from the one that was
few weeks ago when we thought that
President Biden would run for a second
term I think a is is fa now to express
his opinions about the netan government
is's highly critical of it and at the
same time we see also that vice
president Kamala haris who is going to
run on behalf of the Democrats is she's
more worried about how the progressive
voters in the United States would react
in the election if there is no CIS fire
I think in this sense Hamas needs to
accept that if it wants a c it wants a
deal it goes to
Washington Yosi thank you very much for
that that was Yosi melar of chadam house